# 4Dsurvival

This is the project about joint analysis of clinical risk factors and 4D cardiac motion for survival prediction using a hybrid deep-learning network.

In recent years, there has been an increasing interest in applying deep-learning (DL) techniques to medical research, due to the arising of more and more structurized and complex data - clinical and genomic for instance. With its flexibility and ability for handing large data set, deep-learning network shows many advantages over traditional statistical models, especially for prediction task. Particularly, in survival analysis area, many traditional topics, including time-dependent covariates, competing risks, begin to be explored in deep-learning framework. In this thesis, two general extensions are pro- posed based on Bello et al. (2019), in which they predicted the survival outcomes using high dimensional cardiac motion data for a cohort of patients with pulmonary hyper- tension.

In the first extension, a novel approach is come up for joining the high dimensional time-resolved cardiac motion features and comparably low dimensional clinical factors to increase the survival prediction performance. Different methods are also suggested to find the the optimal way to insert these extra covariate factors in deep networks. Espe- cially, correlation analysis between autoencoder latent code and covariates features are conducted for explaining the level of association between both and exploring how these two streams of information interact. This extension opens up new directions for the use of heterogeneous clinical factors to push artificial intelligence towards personalized medical treatment. It is believed that similar approaches could also be used to introduce knowledge of genetic variants to such survival networks to improve outcome prediction by jointly analysing cardiac motion traits with inheritable risk factors.

The other extension lies in relaxing the Cox proportional hazard model and instead, harnessing the flexibility of the network to learn the probability distribution of survival time directly (Lee et al., 2018). It is also capable of modelling time-varying relationship between covariates and the risk. The novelty of this part is that, to my best knowledge, it is the first time to implement probability distribution prediction with cardiac motion data set mixed with clinical factors, and achieves better performance over the optimal model described in the first extension. The significance of this work is providing a new heuristic thinking for survival models in deep-learning framework, forcing the network to learn different elements in survival analysis.

The part of code has been uploaded.
